hello and welcome
to night sky news with me astrophysicist
dr becky smith this is the series where
we chat about everything you should look
out for in the night sky in the coming
months
and we chat about what's been going on
in space news
in the past month so let's kick off this
episode for february 2021
and start by looking up
so last month i talked about the winter
hexagon the six
bright stars that ring the constellation
of orion and i heard from so
many of you that you managed to go
outside and spot it for the very
first time so i thought i'd highlight it
again this month for all of you who want
to see it but you're not necessarily
sure
what you're looking for because there's
going to be a half moon
smack bang in the middle of it on sunday
the 21st of february now it should be
very easy to find the moon
and then from there look out for the six
bright stars around it if you start
at rigel which is just below orion's
belt which i know a lot of people
are able to recognize if you start from
there go down to sirius then
up to the star pro scion to pollux up to
capella right at the tippity top and
then down to the red star
aldebaran and back down to where we
started at rigel spot this while you can
because the changing of the seasons
means that
in the northern hemisphere at least
we're not going to be able to see this
in our night sky
for much longer so you might have
noticed it's been setting earlier and
earlier as the days march on but in its
place we have the summer triangle
instead and that's beginning to make an
appearance in the very early morning sky
just before dawn again like the winter
hexi and this isn't an official
constellation it's just a really easy
pattern of stars to pick out in the sky
because they are so bright in fact if
you look to the east before dawn so
whatever window of your house tends to
get the the morning sun and that you can
see the sunrise from
you should be able to spot these really
easily because they're the brightest
stars so they'll probably be the only
things
left that you can see against the the
brightening of the sky with with the
sunrise so the three stars are called
deneb
vega and altair and now i've pointed out
you won't be able to unsee it
back to the evening sky for a little bit
though now because on the 3rd of march
mars is going to get really close to the
star cluster pleiades it's going to be
about two and a half degrees
away from it which is about five full
moon distances which sounds pretty far
but actually
in terms of the sky it really isn't it
actually means that if you grab a pair
of binoculars and look at mars you
should be able to see both mars and
piedes
at the same time with a pair of
binoculars it's the closest together
that mars and brides have been like on
the sky from our perspective since 1991
and they won't get that close again
until 2038 so it's definitely something
that you want to go out and try
and catch so no matter where you are in
the world if you look for this in the
evening sky so just after sunset you
know quite high
in the south west and you find orion's
belt
and use it to draw a line up to pleiades
where you'll see about you know six to
eight stars clustered together looking
like a beautiful little mini plow or a
big dipper
and next to it will be the unmistakable
red glow
of mars then on the 9th the 11th of
march is about a week later
we're gonna have a toenail moon or a
crescent moon which is pairing up with
jupiter
mercury and saturn in the early morning
sky
now the moon and three planets really
will be a spectacular
sight but not all of us will probably
get to spot it the further south you are
the better as the planets in the moon
will be much higher in the sky
whereas here in the uk we are just a
little bit too far north for me to have
any hope of spotting this right you know
it is still winter here so you know the
north pole is still pointing away from
the sun and therefore away
from the part of the sky where the moon
and jupiter and mercury and sun
will all be because this is so close to
sunrise that you need
to look for this but if you are furthest
out then you do manage to spot this then
make sure you take a picture and send it
to me on social media because
you know i love a good toenail moon but
the other reason to take a picture is
because you might actually struggle to
pick out mercury with your eye it is
going to be a lot fainter than jupiter
and saturn and obviously the sun is
rising quickly
behind this as well so the sky will be
lightning make it even
more difficult to spot but if you break
out your phone and you take like a three
second or a 10 second exposure on like a
night mode like a lot of phones you're
able to these days or you'd grab a bit
more of a sophisticated
camera perhaps then snap a pic see if
the camera can pick it out
as well and you'll be able to spot
mercury that way speaking of mercury
now is actually the best time to try and
spot it because on march 6th it reaches
its furthest position
from the sun from earth's perspective
anyway in the sky
what we call its greatest elongation
what that means for us is that it will
rise higher in the sky
before the sun rises quickly behind it
right because that's the problem with
mercury is that if you're looking in the
direction of mercury
you're also looking in the direction of
the sun as well and because it is quite
small it
is very faint but luckily throughout
march jupiter is going to be
very very close to it which is a really
nice signpost of where to look because
jupiter is
so much brighter it's one of the
brightest things in
the sky so if you can find jupiter
towards the sunrise you can then sort of
hop from there
to find mercury all right that's enough
for looking up at the sky let's come
back down to earth and chat about what's
been happening in space news
in the past month
so another month another spacex starship
test
and another explosion so starship
is spacex's new reusable heavy
lift launch rocket the kind that could
launch humans on long
journeys through space and perhaps even
be used as a reusable
moon landing system this was its seventh
test in its second high altitude test
after the one they did
back in december and like that one back
in december the
launch and the flight went great it was
just the landing that didn't go to plan
this time one of the engines actually
failed
during that flip maneuver that it does
to rewrite itself so that it can self
land
and be reused and obviously instead that
led to a crash
landing now crash landing though isn't a
failure right you learn
so much when things go wrong as opposed
to when things go right so the team
will make all of the necessary
adjustments in time for the next test
it was all success though for the hope
probe and the tian wen
one which last week both successfully
arrived at mars
changing their trajectory to orbit
around the red
planet now the hope probe is the uae's
very first mission to mars and the plan
is for it to stay
in orbit around mars that it can study
daily
and seasonal changes to weather patterns
on mars and in particular study the dust
storms that can grow
to be planet-wide on
mars and it's these planet-wide dust
storms that have always been a real
danger to any mission to mars
whether that is a robotic mission or
whether that is
a crude mission to mars as well so it's
very important that we know more about
those
now the tian wen one is the chinese
national space administration probe
and it has an orbiting probe a lander
and
a rover now its mission is to search for
evidence of both
current and past life on mars and it's
getting
through a combination of things so from
very detailed surface maps to making
maps the distribution of the ice on mars
as well
to soil samples to studying the
atmosphere also
you know the orbiter rover and land are
all working
together now they're not going to
attempt to actually land
the lander and rover on mars until may
unlike nasa's perseverance mission which
will actually arrive at mars on thursday
the 18th of february at 3 pm east coast
time
in the u.s and actually land on the same
day
and i know i am going to be watching the
live stream from mission control on that
day because
i just want to be present for that like
seven minutes of like nail biting
terror as the craft like descends
through the martian atmosphere at like
12 000 miles an hour you're just going
to keep your fingers crossed that
everything goes smoothly and
the parachute comes out all right and
you end up with a soft landing
and not a crash landing because we want
this craft to survive because one thing
that i'm so excited for on the
perseverance mission
is the little mini helicopter it's
carrying called ingenuity it's a little
bit like a drone i guess
it's a complete proof of concept it's
never actually been done
before to achieve flight in you know
mars's thin
atmosphere but what it would do is just
make exploration of the surface of mars
much easier because it can go
places that perseverance the rover which
has been nicknamed percy which i
love you know they just can't go so
it'll help it on its mission
to you know look for these current and
past
signs of life again what we call
biosignatures either in the soil or in
the martian atmosphere
but also one of the things that percy
will be testing is if you can actually
make
oxygen from the co2 the carbon dioxide
that makes up the bulk
of the martian atmosphere and that
really is just one of those
things that will sort of pave the way i
guess it's really sort of part of the
preparations
for maybe sending humans to mars one day
now you're probably wondering why
there's three missions
all arriving at mars at once pretty much
within
like 10 days of each other it's like
buses isn't it like you wait for one and
three turn up at once but there's a good
reason
for it it's all to do with the relative
positions of earth and mars along their
orbit around the sun
when you launch the mission it's
something we call
astro dynamics astrodynamics
yeah so when you launch something to
mars you don't want to launch it
directly at where mars is then because
in six months time when it gets there
mars will have
moved so when you launch it you want to
launch it at where mars
is going to be the thing is though
that the earth takes what 365 days to go
around
the sun mars takes 687 days so the two
are always sort of playing a little bit
of a game of catch up along their orbit
around the sun
so what you don't want to do is launch
towards mars when earth is on one side
of the sun
and mars is on the other side of the sun
you want to do it when earth and mars
are on the same side of the sun and
earth is actually catching
up to mars a little bit there's only a
limited time though
when that actually happens they're
called launch
windows for mars these launch windows
occur every 26 months or so and they
last for about
three weeks the last one was from the
end of july 2020 to the middle
of august in 2020 and so all of hope
tien when one and perseverance were all
launched
pretty much at the same time within that
one launch window
hence why they're all now rocking up at
mars within 10 days of each other
now another piece of news i want to
mention is the latest paper from the
dark energy spectroscopic instrument
legacy imaging surveys
or des for short this is a survey
conducted with the fourth
mail telescope at the peak observatory
in arizona in the usa
now its main goal was to measure the
redshift of tens of millions of galaxies
out to a distance about 11 billion
light years away and our redshift is a
measure of how fast a galaxy is moving
away from us and the reason astronomers
wanted that is because they wanted to
study the expansion of the universe and
in particular
the accelerated expansion of the
universe that's been caused by something
we've dubbed dark energy
but we have no idea what that actually
is or why it's causing
this accelerated expansion of the
universe that's a problem for another
day though because
one of the exciting things that comes
out from surveys like this where you
observe
millions and millions of galaxies is a
load of serendipitous discoveries
as well and last month hwang and
collaborators on the survey team
announced the discovery of 1210
gravitational lenses they use what's
called a neural network
to do this essentially machine learning
it was training a computer on some known
examples of gravitational lenses and
getting it to identify
similar looking objects so a
gravitational lens can be explained by
einstein's theory of general relativity
is theory to explain what gravity was
he said if things have mass they curve
space-time the more mass an object has
the more that it curves
space-time and anything traveling along
that space
for example light or a planet or a star
will travel along a curved path so if
you have light from a very distant
galaxy that's in the background
passed by a very massive galaxy that's
closer to us
in the foreground that is bending space
around it
that light is also bent and you end up
either with a ring
if those two galaxies are perfectly
aligned or an
arc if not the foreground galaxy
literally acts like a lens
and changes the path of the light here's
some examples of the ones that huang and
collaborators
found with their machine the red and
yellow in the center reach images the
foreground galaxies and then those
little blue arcs or little points of
blue light
are from distant galaxies that have been
bent or brightened by this gravitational
lensing there's probably more of these
lenses buried in the survey images
somewhere because these machine learning
algorithms you know they're not
perfect they don't pick out everything
and you know they only pick out the
things that you tell them to look for
not the things that you don't tell them
to look for that might be sort of the
weird and wonderful and new discoveries
that
we may be missing but you know 1210
new lenses is a huge number and this
database will be an absolute boon to
those people who are studying you know
either dark matter or
testing alternate gravity theories you
know seeing if these lenses can be
you know better explained by a different
theory of gravity
rather than einstein's theory of general
relativity which then suggests there's
loads of dark matter there
so there's gonna be a lot of studies i
think that come off the back
of this new database that's been
published all right on to
the big news this month was it really
phosphine
on venus now if you cast your mind back
to
september 2020 and the hubbub that was
created by the announcement of the
detection of phosphine
in the atmosphere of venus phosphine is
ph3 one atom of phosphorus and three
of hydrogen and people got very excited
about this because it was unexpected
and crucially it was unexplained now the
authors of this study published back in
september 2020 greaves and collaborators
essentially ruled out all of the known
ways
of producing phosphines that was
everything from sunlight to
lightning to volcanoes on the surface of
venus none of those
could explain how much phosphine they
claim
to have detected so essentially they
said it was either some
unknown geological process
or the other thing that it could
possibly
be is that there are microbes on earth
that don't need
oxygen to survive that are known to
produce
phosphene and even though they very
tentatively stated this of course people
got
way way over excited about it as people
all want to do when it comes to aliens
even if those aliens are teeny tiny
microbes i have to admit
even myself i got very caught up in
the excitement around it and even
rewrote the lyrics to david bowie's life
on mars to be life on venus of course
the research paper
never claimed they had actually detected
life all they claimed was the detection
of phosphine now publishing any
scientific paper is sort of like a
message to the scientific community to
be like please
discuss amongst yourselves you know
please scrutinize
this work and maybe come up with some
ideas of your own
to explain what we've found here
and a paper that was published this
month by linkowski and collaborators is
claiming that in the original study
graves and collaborators didn't actually
detect phosphine at all
but that they'd analyzed the data wrong
and instead had just detected sulfur
dioxide
the most common element in venus's
atmosphere so to understand what's going
on here we really need to understand
what actually was the detection that
greaves and collaborators
originally made in that paper published
back in september
2020. so what they did was they observed
venus with a radio telescope and that's
important because phosphine is known
to absorb a very specific wavelength of
color
of radio light so if you were to
observe venus and make a trace of how
much of every single wavelength or color
of light
you detect you would find a dip at this
very very specific wavelength
the deeper the dip you have the more of
that molecule or element or whatever it
is you've got
absorbing that light now phosphine
absorbs light with a wavelength of
1.123053
the thing is sulfur dioxide also
absorbs radio light but with a
wavelength of 1.123058
millimeters so the two you know they're
very very close together and when you
observe it your detectors aren't perfect
right so
the two can actually merge together if
your detector isn't sensitive enough to
resolve the difference between
those two wavelengths now grease and
collaborators
obviously knew this when they published
their work back in september 2020 and
it's one of the reasons they actually
spent about
four years making sure that what they
were claiming was actually
right because they'd actually seen this
back in 2016
in data taken with the jcmt
now obviously they wanted to check that
what they had detected was not just
sulfur dioxide and that actually was
some phosphine
in this dip as well contributing to how
deep it was
so what they did was they used a
different radio telescope called
alma to observe this again make sure
they saw this exact same
dip where phosphene was expected to be
absorbing but also crucially
they wanted to observe a different
wavelength this time at 1.102564
millimeters where sulfur dioxide also
absorbs that as well as the one that's
very very close
to phosphine and the depth of that dip
could tell them
how much sulfur dioxide was present in
the atmosphere if you then know how much
it is you then
know how deep to expect the other dip to
be that's very close to phosphine
and if you've got a dip that's deeper
than that then you know that that's the
contribution
from phosphine and so that's what
greaves and collaborators did they
observed the other wavelength
and said there's not much there you
can't account for this huge dip we've
seen
at this wave month where both phosphine
and sulfur dioxide are
so we've definitely detected phosphate
but in this new paper
lincoln skin collaborators model the
depth and shape of these absorption
dips that you would expect and found
that they could actually explain it
completely with sulfur dioxide alone as
long as it was coming from much higher
in the venus atmosphere 80 kilometers
above
the surface whereas greaves and
collaborators claimed that their
detection of phosphine and sulfur was at
56 kilometers
above the surface of venus not 80
kilometers
up and this is a big deal because 80
kilometers up
the atmosphere is much thinner you're
much more exposed to radiation from the
sun
if radiation from the sun hits into a
molecule of phosphine
it breaks apart and so phosphine doesn't
exactly survive
at those incredibly high altitudes which
means you would never be able to detect
it
at the strength that greaves and
collaborators claimed
that they had at least that high up in
the atmosphere
on top of that this study also realized
that there was an issue
with the alma data that had been missed
by greaves and collaborators
now alma is a very special type of um
telescope or instrument so
most detectors on the back of telescopes
what they'll do is they will observe an
object like venus
take all of the light from that object
and then make a trace of how
much of each wavelength they've observed
alma doesn't do that though
alma can actually say okay in this area
of the image
how much of each wavelength have i
observed and in this area of the image
how much wavelength so you can see
sort of spatially what the traces are
it's like getting a trace to every
single pixel
on the image what that means though is
that it makes your signal
weaker so you know any absorption being
caused by a gas like phosphine in
venus's atmosphere or like sulfur
dioxide
would be spread out across all of these
different pixels and you would
assume that there is less there like
assuming there was
less sulfur dioxide than there actually
was
and so linkowski and collaborators claim
that if you correct
for that weakening and that spreading
out
you can actually explain greaves and
collaborators alma observations
again with just sulfur dioxide
and you don't need any phosphene so
that's
two very convincing arguments
for there being no phosphine on venus
so i wouldn't blame you right now if you
were just a little bit confused because
it's hard to know
like who to believe do you believe
grieves and collaborators claims or
debris
linkowski collaborators claims but
i just i don't think we've heard the end
of this yet you know i think there's
going to be more observations
more discussion more analysis before we
have any sort of definitive answer
on whether there's phosphine on venus or
even life
on venus who knows but this really is
just
science in action and i just
i love it phone that can do like a three
second or a 10 second exposure like you
know a lot of camera phones
can do these days camera phones how old
am i
no i'm good over the martian atmosphere
and again that's one of those things
that will really
help sort of pave the way for a possible
shut up redshift is essentially a
measure of how fast
the galaxies are moving away from us
because i should fit one that
can't even say astrophysicist it's my
own job title if you
cast your mind back to sep twenty twenty
twelve